# PheWeb2 API
This is an implementation of the data model and API for [PheWeb2](https://github.com/GaglianoTaliun-Lab/PheWeb2/tree/main) — an enhanced version of the original [PheWeb](https://github.com/statgen/pheweb) web-based tool for interactive querying, visualizing, and sharing summary-level results from genome-wide and phenome-wide association studies (GWAS/PheWAS), which offers intuitive and efficient support for stratified analysis results. PheWeb2 decouples the data model and API from the user interface (UI) to improve code maintenance and reusability and allow results querying by other external resources and applications. 
  
## 1. Install

> [!NOTE]
> The code was developed and tested with Python 3.12+ on Linux-based OS.

You can install PheWeb2 and all required dependencies within a virtual environment using the following steps:
1. Clone this repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/GaglianoTaliun-Lab/PheWeb2-API.git
cd PheWeb2-API
```
2. Create and activate Python virtual environment:
```
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
```
3. Install PheWeb2 Python package and its dependencies:
```
pip install -e .
```

## 2. Test it out using our small example data
To familiarize yourself with PheWeb2, we recommend first trying to configure and run it with the provided example dataset by following the steps below.

1. Download and unarchive the example data (~13 GB):
```
wget https://objets.juno.calculquebec.ca/swift/v1/AUTH_290e6dcc5e264b34b401f54358bd4c54/pheweb_example_data/example_regenie.tar.gz
tar -xzvf example_regenie.tar.gz
```

2. Import the example manifest file describing phenotypes:
```
pheweb2 phenolist import-phenolist manifest-example.csv 
```

3. Ingest the example data into PheWeb2 (this can take some time):
```
pheweb2 process
```

4. Run automated tests of the API routes:
```
pytest tests/test_routes.py -s -v
```
<details>
<summary>Click to see an example of passed tests.</summary>
  
```
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_phenotypes                PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_gene_names                PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_gene_PCSK9                PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_tophits                   PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_stratifications           PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_variant_10_112999020_G_T  PASSED
```

</details>

5.  Launch PheWeb2 API endpoint which will be available at `http://127.0.0.1:9543`:
```
pheweb2 serve --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9543
```

## 3. Run using your own data

### 3.1. Configuration file `config.py`
The self-documenting [config.py](config.py) configuration file includes all the variables that determine where PheWeb 2 API stores ingested GWAS data, how it processes this data, and how it serves it through HTTP. 

When performing GWAS data ingestion, you should focus on adjusting the variables in *SECTION A*, *SECTION B*, and *SECTION C* of this file:

- *SECTION A* of the [config.py](config.py) file lists the configuration variables that control the location of the processed GWAS summary statistics.
- *SECTION B* of the [config.py](config.py) file lists the configuration variables that control the versions of the external public databases such as dbSNP and GENCODE.
- *SECTION C* of the [config.py](config.py) file lists the configuration variables that control GWAS summary statistics ingestion.

When running an API endpoint, you should focus on adjusting the variables in *SECTION D* of the [config.py](config.py) file that control the API URL address, the number of API workers to handle HTTP requests, and so on.

### 3.2. Minimal GWAS summary statistics file

> [!NOTE]
> The current version of PheWeb 2 API has been tested using GWAS summary statistics output files generated by [Regenie](https://rgcgithub.github.io/regenie/).

> [!IMPORTANT]
> PheWeb 2 relies on the `TEST`/`test` column in GWAS summary statistics files to distinguish variant effects from interactions. While Regenie and [PLINK2](https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/2.0/) GWAS ummary statistics files by default include the `TEST` column, which provides details on the statistical tests reported (e.g., *ADD*, *ADD-CONDTL*, *ADD-INT_SNPxVAR*, *ADDxCOVAR1*), other tools may not include this column. In such cases, we recommend adding a `TEST` column with the appropriate values to your GWAS ummary statistics files. Then, you can define the values representing each test in your GWAS ummary statistics files using `ASSOC_TEST_NAME` and `INTERACTION_TEST_NAME` variables in the [config.py](config.py) file.

The table below presents a minimal list of expected columns in GWAS summary statistics files. You can modify their names using the `FIELD_ALIASES` variable in the [config.py](config.py) file.

| column description | column name | allowed values              |
| ------------------ | ----------- | --------------------------- |
| Chromosome         | CHROM       | 1-22, 23/X                  |
| Position           | GENPOS      | Integer                     |
| Reference Allele   | ALLELE0     | Must match reference genome |
| Effect Allele      | ALLELE1     | Anything                    |
| Beta               | BETA        | Float                       |
| Standard Error     | SE          | Float                       |
| Log-10 P-value     | LOG10P      | Float                       |
| Statistical Test   | TEST        | Anything. Typical values: ADD, ADD-CONDTL, ADD-INT_SNPxVAR, ... |

### 3.3. Summary statistics exclusion criteria
During the ingestion of GWAS summary statistics, PheWeb 2 will apply the following exclusions:
- If a required field is null (i.e., any of the following: [’’, ‘.’, ‘NA’, ‘N/A’, ‘n/a’, ‘nan’, ‘-nan’, ‘NaN’, ‘-NaN’, ‘null’, ‘NULL’]), the variant will be discarded.
- If the minor allele frequency (MAF) of the variant falls below a specified threshold (defined by the `ASSOC_MIN_MAF` variable in the [config.py](config.py) file), the variant will be excluded.
- If the MAF of the variant is below a specified threshold (defined by the `INTERACTION_MIN_MAF` variable in the [config.py](config.py) file), the interaction effect for this variant will not be imported.
- When genotype imputation quality scores are available, if the imputation quality for a variant falls below a specified threshold (defined by the `MIN_IMP_QUALITY` variable in the [config.py](config.py) file), the variant will be excluded.

> [!NOTE]
> When filtering by imputation quality scores, the scores can be provided as a column inside the GWAS summary statistics file (e.g., the Regenie outputs imputation quality scores in the `INFO` column) or in the external indexed VCF files outputted by the genotype imputation software (e.g., [minimac4](https://github.com/statgen/Minimac4)). See an example inside the [config.py](config.py) file.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The imputation quality scores recomputed by Regenie may differ from the scores outputted by the genotype imputation software, as Regenie uses dosages only for a subset of individuals included in GWAS who have phenotype and covariate data. When conducting stratified analyses, we recommend using the original genotype imputation quality scores computed by the imputation software.

### 3.4. Creating the Manifest file

To ingest GWAS summary statistics files into PheWeb2, you need to create the Manifest file. The Manifest file is a comma-separated (CSV) file that describes each GWAS summary statistics file you have. The [manifest-example.csv](manifest-example.csv) file serves as an example of the Manifest file, and the table below lists the required and optional columns.

| column description                                  | value         | allowed values                      | required? |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------- | --------- |
| Phenotype Code                                      | phenocode     | string                              | true      |
| Phenotype Description                               | phenostring   | string                              | true      |
| Location of summary statistics                      | assoc_files   | string                              | true      |
| Number of tested samples / participants             | num_samples   | int                                 | true     |
| Number of tested cases                              | num_cases     | int                                 | false     |
| Number of tested controls                           | num_controls  | int                                 | false     |
| Category of trait                                   | category      | float                               | false     |
| Variable of Interaction Testing                     | interaction   | string                              | false     |
| Category of stratification (Can be more than one)   | interaction   | "stratification.*" (where *=string) | false     |


### 3.5. Ingesting GWAS summary statistics files using a single node

> [!NOTE]
> Although parallelized, data ingestion may still take some time, depending on the number and size of your GWAS summary statistics files.
> The ingested data will be by default stored inside the `generated_by_pheweb` folder, but this can be controlled using the `PHEWEB_DATA_DIR` variable inside the [config.py](config.py) file.
> After the data ingestion, you may archive your original GWAS summary statistics files, as PheWeb2 will no longer need them.

Once you have edited the [config.py](config.py) file and created the Manifest file, execute the following commands inside the root directory of the PheWeb2 API.

1. Import the manifest file into PheWeb2:
```
pheweb2 phenolist import-phenolist /path/to/manifest.csv
```
This command creates a `pheno-list.json` file in the root directory.

2. Set the number of parallel ingestion jobs using the `NUM_PROCS` parameter in the [config.py](config.py) file.

3. Ingest the GWAS summary statistics into PheWeb2:
```
pheweb2 process
```

### 3.6. Ingesting GWAS summary statistics files using SLURM or SGE

> [!NOTE]
> Although parallelized, data ingestion may still take some time, depending on the number and size of your GWAS summary statistics files.
> The ingested data will be by default stored inside the `generated_by_pheweb` folder, but this can be controlled using the `PHEWEB_DATA_DIR` variable inside the [config.py](config.py) file.
> After the data ingestion, you may archive your original GWAS summary statistics files, as PheWeb2 will no longer need them.


Once you have edited the [config.py](config.py) file and created the Manifest file, execute the following commands inside the root directory of the PheWeb2 API.

1. Import the manifest file into PheWeb2:
```
pheweb2 phenolist import-phenolist /path/to/manifest.csv
```
This command creates a `pheno-list.json` file in the root directory.

2. Create a SLURM/SGE job submission bash script for parsing the GWAS summary statistics files:
```
pheweb2 cluster --engine=slurm --step=parse --N_per_job=3
```
or
```
pheweb2 cluster --engine=sge --step=parse --N_per_job=3
```
A bash script named `slurm-parse-[DATETIME].sh` or `sge-parse-[DATETIME].sh` will be generated in the `generated-by-pheweb/tmp/` directory. If you have modified the `PHEWEB_DATA_DIR` variable in the [config.py](config.py) configuration file, the script will be placed in the `[PHEWEB_DATA_DIR]/tmp/` directory instead.

To specify the maximum number of GWAS files to parse sequentially per parallel job, use the `--N_per_job` option (the default is 3). You can also include an optional `--account` argument in the `pheweb2 cluster` command to specify your SLURM account name if needed.

3. Submit the SLURM/SGE jobs for parsing GWAS summary statistics files to the queue:
```
sbatch generated-by-pheweb/tmp/slurm-parse-[DATETIME].sh
``` 
or 
```
sge generated-by-pheweb/tmp/sge-parse-[DATETIME].sh
``` 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Depending on your GWAS files' size and your cluster's configuration, you may need to adjust the job submission parameters in the bash script. This could involve increasing the job time limit or memory limit, or specifying a queue/account name.

4. Reading through all the parsed GWAS files to generate a `sites-unannotatedtes.tsv` that contains all the unique variants:
```
pheweb2 sites
```

5. Downloading gene aliases database in `generated-by-pheweb/resources/` (need internet):
```
pheweb2 make-gene-aliases-sqlite3
```

6. Adding rsids and genes to the sites file (it may take a few hours; need internet):
```
pheweb2 add-rsids
pheweb2 add-genes
```

7. Generate variant id <-> rsid database:
```
pheweb2 make-cpras-rsids-sqlite3
```

8. Create SLURM/SGE job submission script for generating all variants' information, manhattan data, and qq data for all the phenotypes (methods similar to the parsing step):
```
pheweb2 cluster --engine=slurm --step=augment-phenos --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME>
pheweb2 cluster --engine=slurm --step=manhattan --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME>
pheweb2 cluster --engine=slurm --step=qq --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME> 
```
or
```
pheweb2 cluster --engine=sge --step=augment-phenos --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME>
pheweb2 cluster --engine=sge --step=manhattan --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME>
pheweb2 cluster --engine=sge --step=qq --N_per_job=3 --account=<USERNAME>
```

Once you have the script, you can submit the jobs by running: 
```
sbatch generated-by-pheweb/tmp/slurm-augment-phenos-<DATETIME>.sh
sbatch generated-by-pheweb/tmp/slurm-manhattan-<DATETIME>.sh
sbatch generated-by-pheweb/tmp/slurm-qq-<DATETIME>.sh
``` 
or 
```
sge generated-by-pheweb/tmp/sge-augment-phenos-<DATETIME>.sh
sge generated-by-pheweb/tmp/sge-manhattan-<DATETIME>.sh
sge generated-by-pheweb/tmp/sge-qq-<DATETIME>.sh
``` 

9. Create the phenotype matrix:
``` 
pheweb2 matrix
```

10. Create the best-phenos-by-gene database:
```
pheweb2 gather-pvalues-for-each-gene
```

11. 
```
pheweb2 phenotypes && pheweb2 top-hits
```

12.
```
pheweb2 best-of-pheno
```

13.
```
pheweb2 generate-autocomplete-db
```

14.
```
pheweb2 process
``` 

### 3.6. Running API server
1. To run the API server in production mode, run:
```
pheweb2 serve --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9543 --gunicorn
```
To run the API in dev mode, run:
```
pheweb2 serve --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9543
```
you can add argument `--enable-cache` to enable the API cache like:
```
pheweb2 serve --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9543 --gunicorn --enable-cache 
```

in config.py, you can specify api url prefix 

2. Once it's running, in a separate terminal window, you can test it by running the following commands:
```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/phenotypes/"
```
this should give you a list of all the phenotypic information.
```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/gene/"
```
this should give you a list of all the gene names.
```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/gene/PCSK9"
```
this should give you phenotypic information related to gene PCSK9
```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/phenotypes/tophits"
```
to get rsid

```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/variant/stratification_list"
```
to get the stratificaiton list
[
    "european.female",
    "european.male",
    "european.both"
]

```
curl -X GET "http://localhost:9543/variant/6-32658525-T-G/european.male"
```
to get phenotypic information of the chosen variant


get data through http://localhost:9543/PATH/TO/ROUTES/

e.g. to view phenotype table data, go to http://localhost:9543/phenotypes

### 3.7 Developing mode
1. Before running the API under dev mode, you may want to first turn on the debug mode by setting `ENABLE_DEBUG` variable in [config.py](config.py) file to be `True`

2. Then run API on dev mode:
```
pheweb2 serve --host 127.0.0.1 --port 9543
```
When the debug mode is turned on on dev mode, you will see messages from the terminal like:
```
 * Serving Flask app 'pheweb_api.api_app'
 * Debug mode: on
WARNING: This is a development server. Do not use it in a production deployment. Use a production WSGI server instead.
 * Debugger is active!
```
and some messages starting with `DEBUG...` when API is triggered.


## Testing
To test the API routes, run:
```
pytest tests/test_routes.py -s -v
```
you should see:
```
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_phenotypes PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_gene_names PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_gene_PCSK9 PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_tophits PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_stratifications PASSED
tests/test_routes.py::test_get_variant_10_112999020_G_T PASSED
```



 
## Documentation

>> you can play with [http://localhost:9543/](http://localhost:9543/) (or the location of your backend API instance). It is an interactive API documentation to see details of all available routes and their functions.

To see all available API routes, visit http://localhost:9543/ (or the location of your backend API instance).



